Update OpenTelemetry Runtime Metrics Documentation (#36004)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/integrations/runtime_metrics/_index.md

- Java
- .NET
- Go

> - NodeJS

Reviewer: **"NodeJS" → "Node.js"**

The body text in the tab already uses "Node.js" correctly (for example, "for Node.js applications"). The Compatibility list and both tab labels should match.

```suggestion
- Node.js
```

Also update the tab labels on lines 143 and 239: `{{% tab "NodeJS" %}}` → `{{% tab "Node.js" %}}` and `{{< tab "NodeJS" >}}` → `{{< tab "Node.js" >}}`.

- [Java 8][5]
- [Java 17][6]

#### Collector configuration

> The `jvm.gc.collections.count` and `jvm.gc.collections.elapsed` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Additionally, ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` is set as well.

Reviewer: "Additionally" and "as well" are redundant. Same pattern appears in the Go tab (line 82) and .NET tab (line 126).

```suggestion
The `jvm.gc.collections.count` and `jvm.gc.collections.elapsed` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Also set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta`.
```

- [Java 8][5]
- [Java 17][6]

#### Collector configuration

> The `jvm.gc.collections.count` and `jvm.gc.collections.elapsed` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Also set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` otel processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `jvm.gc.collections.count` and `jvm.gc.collections.elapsed` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. To ensure correct behavior, set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` processor.
```

> The `jvm.gc.collections.count` and `jvm.gc.collections.elapsed` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. To ensure correct behavior, set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `jvm.gc.collections.count` and `jvm.gc.collections.elapsed` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` processor.
```

```yaml
processors:
  deltatorate:
    metrics:
      - jvm.gc.collections.count
      - jvm.gc.collections.elapsed
```

[3]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/
[4]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/java/manual/
[5]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/runtime-telemetry/runtime-telemetry-java8/library
[6]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/runtime-telemetry/runtime-telemetry-java17/library
[8]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/deltatorateprocessor

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Go" %}}

OpenTelemetry Go applications are [instrumented manually][3]. To enable runtime metrics, see the documentation for the [runtime package][4].

#### Collector configuration

> Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Additionally, ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` is set to handle other metrics as well.

Reviewer 2: if you have the `cumulativetodelta` processor, you don't need `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta`. Actually I'd be worried the env var would just override the processor excludes..
I would just recommend the processors I think

Reviewer 2: Actually, I just realized with Claude, that we MUST NOT have the env var set otherwise it will make the metrics delta before they reach the collector:
> OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta causes the SDK to produce delta before it reaches the Collector. The processor  
  exclusion is irrelevant for those — the metric is already delta, and the cumulativetodelta processor automatically passes through delta metrics unchanged regardless of    
  your exclude config.

> Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Additionally, ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` is set to handle other metrics as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Additionally, ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE` is *not* set to delta, as excluded metrics from `cumulativetodelta` would then not be excluded.
```

> Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Additionally, ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE` is *not* set to delta, as excluded metrics from `cumulativetodelta` would then be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE` is not set to `delta`. Otherwise, metrics excluded by `cumulativetodelta` are ignored.
```

> Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE` is not set to `delta`. Otherwise, metrics excluded by `cumulativetodelta` are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Go runtime metrics are reported as monotonic sums, but Datadog expects them as gauges. The [Transform Processor][8] converts these sums to gauges, and the [Cumulative-to-Delta Processor][9] excludes them from delta conversion. Verify that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE` is not set to `delta`. Otherwise, metrics excluded by `cumulativetodelta` are ignored.
```

```yaml
processors:
  transform/go-runtime:
    error_mode: ignore
    metric_statements:
      - context: metric
        statements:
          - convert_sum_to_gauge() where name == "process.runtime.go.gc.pause_total_ns" or name == "process.runtime.go.gc.count" or name == "go.memory.allocated" or name == "go.memory.allocations"

  cumulativetodelta:
    exclude:
      metrics:
        - process.runtime.go.gc.pause_total_ns
        - process.runtime.go.gc.count
        - go.memory.allocated
        - go.memory.allocations
      match_type: strict
```

> [3]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/go/manual/

Reviewer 2: no metrics seem to have been pulled for go?

<img width="907" height="407" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/29f1c1a7-5f4f-4065-a8a0-1c92f99575e2" />

Author: Hmm I see it
<img width="728" height="650" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e6b9b665-2a03-42b4-b886-60715b48bee0" />

Reviewer 2: oh weird I see iit now sorry must have been some cache

#### Manual instrumentation

If you use [OpenTelemetry manual instrumentation][4], see the documentation for the [`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-runtime-node`][5] library.

[3]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/js/
[4]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/js/instrumentation/
[5]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib/tree/main/packages/instrumentation-runtime-node

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

Runtime metrics are not enabled by default for Python applications. Install the [`opentelemetry-instrumentation-system-metrics`][5] package:

```shell
pip install opentelemetry-instrumentation-system-metrics
```

If you use [automatic instrumentation][3], `opentelemetry-instrument` discovers and enables the package after installation. If you use [manual instrumentation][4], enable it in your application:

```python
from opentelemetry.instrumentation.system_metrics import SystemMetricsInstrumentor

SystemMetricsInstrumentor().instrument()
```

> [3]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/python/automatic/

Reviewer: This URL returns a 301 redirect — use the canonical URL directly.

```suggestion
[3]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/python/
```

OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL=10000
```

#### Collector configuration

The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` metric requires the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Additionally, ensure that `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` is set as well.

```yaml
processors:
  deltatorate:
    metrics:

>       - dotnet.process.cpu.time

Reviewer 2: They might wanna add the second one if they're using the package in development.. in any case it doesn't hurt 😅 
```suggestion
      - dotnet.process.cpu.time
      - process.cpu.time
```

OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL=10000
```

#### Collector configuration

> The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` metric requires the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Also set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` and `process.cpu.time` metrics requires the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Also set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` otel processor.
```

> The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` and `process.cpu.time` metrics requires the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Also set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` otel processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` and `process.cpu.time` metrics requires the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. To ensure correct behavior, set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` processor.
```

> The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` and `process.cpu.time` metrics requires the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. To ensure correct behavior, set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dotnet.process.cpu.time` and `process.cpu.time` metrics require the [Delta-to-Rate Processor][8] in the OpenTelemetry Collector. Set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_TEMPORALITY_PREFERENCE=delta` or use the `cumulativetodelta` processor.
```

If you use [OpenTelemetry automatic instrumentation][3] for Node.js applications, runtime metrics are enabled by default through the [`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-runtime-node`][5] package.

**Note**: Runtime metrics are only exported if a `MeterProvider` and metric exporter are configured. Set the `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER` environment variable or programmatically configure a `metricReader` in your SDK initialization.

#### Manual instrumentation

If you use [OpenTelemetry manual instrumentation][4], see the documentation for the [`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-runtime-node`][5] library.

#### Host metrics

Host-level metrics such as system CPU and memory usage are not included in OpenTelemetry automatic instrumentation. To collect these metrics, install and configure the [`@opentelemetry/host-metrics`][6] package separately:

```shell
npm install @opentelemetry/host-metrics
```

Then initialize it with your existing `MeterProvider`:

```javascript
const { HostMetrics } = require('@opentelemetry/host-metrics');
const { metrics } = require('@opentelemetry/api');

const hostMetrics = new HostMetrics({
  meterProvider: metrics.getMeterProvider(),
});
hostMetrics.start();

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Host-level metrics such as system CPU and memory usage are not included in OpenTelemetry automatic instrumentation. To collect these metrics:

1. Install and configure the [`@opentelemetry/host-metrics`][6] package:

   ```shell
   npm install @opentelemetry/host-metrics
   ```

2. Initialize the package with your existing `MeterProvider`:

   ```javascript
   const { HostMetrics } = require('@opentelemetry/host-metrics');
   const { metrics } = require('@opentelemetry/api');

   const hostMetrics = new HostMetrics({
     meterProvider: metrics.getMeterProvider(),
   });
   hostMetrics.start();
   ```
````

> For the list of metrics collected by this package, see the [Node Contrib Host](#node-contrib-host) table in the Data collected section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the list of metrics collected by this package, see the [Node Contrib Host table](#node-contrib-host).
```

## Data collected

> The following tables list the OpenTelemetry runtime metrics used in Datadog's out-of-the-box in-app experiences.

Reviewer: Is removing the context about the dual-metric system (users receive both original OTel metrics and mapped Datadog metrics) intentional? If so, the new framing works — but users looking for a conceptual explanation of how the mapping system works will no longer find it here.

Author: @shanelhuang What do you think makes sense to go here? The original message was for the exporter, which isn't completely accurate at this point.

Reviewer 3: @domalessi the removal was intentional since that behavior is no longer correct or exposed to customers. Ideally customers don't have to worry about _how_ the mappings work anymore, and the platform "just works" as expected.

Reviewer: Got it, thanks for clarifying!

{{< mapping-table resource="dotnet-contrib-runtime.csv">}}

<h3>.NET Contrib Process</h3>
<p>These metrics are collected by the <a href="https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-contrib/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.Process">OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.Process</a> package.</p>
{{< mapping-table resource="dotnet-contrib-process.csv">}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "NodeJS" >}}

<h3>Node Contrib Runtime</h3>
<p>These metrics are emitted from auto-instrumentation with the latest version of the OpenTelemetry Node.js SDK.</p>
{{< mapping-table resource="node-contrib-runtime.csv">}}

<h3>Node Contrib Host</h3>
<p>These metrics are collected by the <a href="https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib/tree/main/packages/host-metrics">@opentelemetry/host-metrics</a> package. This package is not included in OpenTelemetry automatic instrumentation and must be installed and configured manually.</p>
{{< mapping-table resource="node-contrib-host.csv">}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

> The following table lists the conceptual equivalences between OpenTelemetry and Datadog Python runtime metrics. There are no direct mappings due to mismatching metric types between the two systems.

Reviewer: "Mismatching" used as an adjective — should be "mismatched".

```suggestion
The following table lists the conceptual equivalences between OpenTelemetry and Datadog Python runtime metrics. There are no direct mappings due to mismatched metric types between the two systems.
```

| Datadog metric | Description | OpenTelemetry metric |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `runtime.python.cpu.time.sys` | Number of seconds executing in the kernel. | `process.cpu.time` (`type: system`) |
| `runtime.python.cpu.time.user` | Number of seconds executing outside the kernel. | `process.cpu.time` (`type: user`) |

> | `runtime.python.cpu.percent` | CPU utilization percentage. OTel divides by 100 × number of cores. | `process.cpu.utilization` |

Reviewer: "OTel divides by 100 × number of cores." is a sentence fragment.

```suggestion
| `runtime.python.cpu.percent` | CPU utilization percentage; OTel divides the raw value by 100 × the number of CPU cores. | `process.cpu.utilization` |
```

{{< mapping-table resource="dotnet-contrib-runtime.csv">}}

<h3>.NET Contrib Process</h3>
<p>These metrics are collected by the <a href="https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-contrib/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.Process">OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.Process</a> package.</p>
{{< mapping-table resource="dotnet-contrib-process.csv">}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "Node.js" >}}

<h3>Node Contrib Runtime</h3>
<p>These metrics are emitted from auto-instrumentation with the latest version of the OpenTelemetry Node.js SDK.</p>
{{< mapping-table resource="node-contrib-runtime.csv">}}

<h3>Node Contrib Host</h3>
<p>These metrics are collected by the <a href="https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib/tree/main/packages/host-metrics">@opentelemetry/host-metrics</a> package. This package is not included in OpenTelemetry automatic instrumentation and must be installed and configured manually.</p>
{{< mapping-table resource="node-contrib-host.csv">}}

{{< /tab >}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

> The following table lists the conceptual equivalences between OpenTelemetry and Datadog Python runtime metrics. There are no direct mappings due to mismatched metric types between the two systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table lists the conceptual equivalences between OpenTelemetry and Datadog Python runtime metrics. There are no direct metric-name mappings because the metric types differ between the two systems.
```

| Datadog metric | Description | OpenTelemetry metric |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `runtime.python.cpu.time.sys` | Number of seconds executing in the kernel. | `process.cpu.time` (`type: system`) |
| `runtime.python.cpu.time.user` | Number of seconds executing outside the kernel. | `process.cpu.time` (`type: user`) |

> | `runtime.python.cpu.percent` | CPU utilization percentage; OTel divides the raw value by 100 × the number of CPU cores. | `process.cpu.utilization` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `runtime.python.cpu.percent` | CPU utilization percentage. OTel divides the raw value by 100 times the number of CPU cores. | `process.cpu.utilization` |
```
